guide/gitops-continuous-delivery.adoc, before:

== GitOps Continuous Delivery with Argo CD

_20 MINUTE EXERCISE_

In this lab you will learn about deploying and managing Kubernetes resources using a GitOps tool.

'''

=== Export OpenShift Resources

First, you need to export the project resources from OpenShift.

In your {{ CHE_URL }}[Workspace^], `*click on 'Terminal' -> 'Run Task...' ->  'GitOps - Export'*`

image:{% image_path che-runtask.png %}[Che - RunTask, 500]

image:{% image_path che-gitops-export.png %}[Che - GitOps Export, 500]

A terminal should be opened with the following output:

[source,shell]
.>_ GitOps Export
----
--- Export Kubernetes resources for GitOps from {{DEV_PROJECT}} to {{PROJECT}} ---
Exporting resources for inventory-coolstore...
Exporting resources for catalog-coolstore...
Exporting resources for gateway-coolstore...
Exporting resources for web-coolstore...
--- Kubernetes resources has been exported! ---
----

This operation exports the project resources (deploymentconfig, route, secret, service)
and cleans them up. As a result, you should have all resources in YAML files under 
the **/project/workshop/lab/gitops** folder.

image:{% image_path che-gitops-export-result.png %}[Che - GitOps Export Result, 300]

'''

=== Push them into a Git Repository

The first step is to store all Kubernetes/OpenShift resources in 
a source code repository. You can use any Git server (e.g. GitHub, BitBucket, etc) for this lab but we have prepared a 
Gogs git server.

`*Click on the below button called 'Developer Repository'*`

[link={{ GOGS_URL }}]
[window=_blank, align="center"]
image::{% image_path developer-repository-button.png  %}[Developer Repository - Button, 300]

Then, `*click on 'Register'*` to register a new user with the following details:


.Gogs Registration
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter
|Value

|Username 
|{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}

|Email
|{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}@none.com

|Password
|{{OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD}}

| Re-Type
|{{OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD}}

|===

image:{% image_path cd-gogs-signup.png %}[Sign Up Gogs,700]

`*Click on 'Create New Account'*`. 
You will be redirected to the sign in page. Sign in using the above username and password.

`*Click on the plus icon*` as below and enter the following values

image:{% image_path cd-gogs-plus-icon.png %}[Create New Repository,900]

.GitOps Repository
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter 
|Value

|Owner*
|{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}

|Repository Name*
|gitops-cn-project

|Visibility
|_unchecked_

|Description
|_leave it empty_

|.gitignore
|_leave it empty_

|License
|_leave it empty_

|Readme
|Default

|Intialize this repository with selected files and templates
|_unchecked_

|===

image:{% image_path gogs-gitops-new-repo.png %}[Create New Repository,700]

`*Click on 'Create Repository' button*`.

The Git repository is created now. 

'''

=== Push The Configuration to the Git Repository

Now that you have a Git repository for the Inventory service, you should push the 
source code into this Git repository.

In your {{ CHE_URL }}[Workspace^], via the command menu (`*'View' -> 'Find Command...'*`),
`*run 'Git: Initialize Repository'*`

image:{% image_path che-git-init.png %}[Che - Git Initialize, 600]

`*Select the '/projects/workshop/labs/gitops' folder, click on 'Initialize Repository' -> 'Add to Workspace'*`

In your {{ CHE_URL }}[Workspace^], open a new Terminal by `*clicking 
on the 'My Workspace' white box in the right menu, then 'Plugins' -> 'workshop-tools' -> '>_ New terminal'*`:

image:{% image_path che-open-workshop-terminal.png %}[Che - Open OpenShift Terminal, 700]

In the window called **'>_ workshop-tools terminal'**, `*execute the following commands*`:

[source,shell]
.>_ workshop-tools terminal
----
cd /projects/workshop/labs/gitops
git remote add origin http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}/gitops-cn-project.git
----

Via the command menu (`*'View' -> 'Find Command...'*`),
`*run 'Git: Close Repository'*`

Via the command menu (`*'View' -> 'Find Command...'*`),
`*run 'Git: Open Repository' and select the '/projects/workshop/labs/gitops' folder*`

Open the **Source Code Management (SCM) view** by clicking on `*'View' -> 'SCM menu'*`

`*Click on '...' -> 'Stage All Changes'*`

image:{% image_path che-scm-gitops-stage-all-changes.png %}[Che - SCM Stage All Changes, 500]

`*Click on the 'check' icon and enter 'Initial' as commit message*`

image:{% image_path che-scm-commit.png %}[Che - SCM Commit, 900]

`*Click on '...' -> 'Push'*`

image:{% image_path che-scm-push.png %}[Che - SCM Push, 500]

`*Click on the 'OK' button*` to publish the new **master branch**. 
Finally, `*enter your Gogs credentials ({{OPENSHIFT_USER}}/{{ OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD }})*`.

image:{% image_path che-scm-username.png %}[Che - SCM Username, 500]

image:{% image_path che-scm-password.png %}[Che - SCM Password, 500]

Once done, in {{ GOGS_URL }}/{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}/gitops-cn-project, `*refresh the page of your 'gitops-cn-project' repository*`. You should 
see the project files in the repository.

image:{% image_path gogs-gitops-repo.png %}[GitOps Repository,900]

'''

=== What is Argo CD?

[sidebar]
--
image:{% image_path argocd-logo.png %}[Argo CD Logo, 200]

https://argoproj.github.io/argo-cd/[Argo CD^] is a declarative, GitOps continuous delivery tool for Kubernetes.

It follows the GitOps pattern of using Git repositories as the source of truth for defining 
the desired application state. 

It automates the deployment of the desired application states in the specified target environments. Application 
deployments can track updates to branches, tags, or pinned to a specific version of manifests at a Git commit.
--

'''

=== Log in to Argo CD

`*Click on the below button called 'Developer GitOps'*`

[link={{ GITOPS_URL }}]
[window=_blank, align="center"]
image::{% image_path developer-gitops-button.png  %}[Developer GitOps - Button, 300]

Then `*login as {{ OPENSHIFT_USER }}/{{ OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD }}*`, `*click on 'Allow selected permissions'*`

Once completed, you will be redirected to the following page.

image:{% image_path argocd-home.png %}[Argo CD - Home Page, 500]

'''

=== Add your Newly Created GitOps Repository 

`*Select the 'Configuration menu' then click on your 'Repositories'*`

image::{% image_path argocd-configure-repositories.png  %}[Argo CD - Configure Repositories, 500]

`*Click on 'CONNECT REPO USING HTTPS'*` and enter the following:

.Repository Configuration
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter 
|Value

|Type
|git

|Repository URL
|http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}/gitops-cn-project.git

|Username (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|Password (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|TLS client certificate (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|TLS client certificate key (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|Skip server verification
|_unchecked_

|Enable LFS support (Git only)
|_unchecked_

|===

Finally, `*Click on 'CONNECT'*`.

Your GitOps repository is now added to Argo CD.

image::{% image_path argocd-repository.png  %}[Argo CD - Repository, 800]

'''

=== Create your GitOps Project 

`*Select the 'Configuration menu' then click on your 'Projects'*`

image::{% image_path argocd-configure-projects.png  %}[Argo CD - Configure Projects, 500]

`*Click on 'NEW PROJECT'*` and enter the following:

.Repository Configuration
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter 
|Value

|Project Name
|{{PROJECT}}

|Project Description
|This is my first GitOps project

|Sources
|http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}/gitops-cn-project.git

|Destination
|* / {{PROJECT}}

|Whitelisted Cluster Resources
|_leave it empty_

|Orphaned Resource Monitoring
|_leave it empty_

|===

Finally, `*Click on 'CREATE'*`.

Your GitOps project has been created in Argo CD.

image::{% image_path argocd-project.png  %}[Argo CD - project, 800]


'''

=== Create a GitOps Application

`*Select the 'Application menu' then click on your '+ New App'*` and enter the following details:

image:{% image_path argocd-configure-application.png %}[Argo CD - Configure Application, 500]

.Application Configuration
[%header,cols=3*]
|===
|Section 
|Parameter 
|Value

|GENERAL
|Application Name
|coolstore

|GENERAL
|Project
|{{PROJECT}}

|GENERAL
|SYNC POLICY
|MANUAL

|SOURCE
|Repository URL
|http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/{{OPENSHIFT_USER}}/gitops-cn-project.git

|SOURCE
|Revision
|HEAD

|SOURCE
|Path
|. _(dot)_

|DESTINATION
|Cluster
|in-cluster (https://kubernetes.default.svc)

|DESTINATION
|Namespace
|{{PROJECT}}

|ALL OTHER SECTIONS
|*
|_leave them empty/by default_

|===

Finally, `*Click on 'CREATE'*`.

Your Coolstore Application has been created in Argo CD.

image::{% image_path argocd-outofsync-application.png  %}[Argo CD - OutOfSync Application, 500]

The application status is initially in yellow **OutOfSync** state since the application has yet to be 
deployed into {{PROJECT}} OpenShift project, and no Kubernetes resources have been created.

'''

=== Sync/Deploy The GitOps Application

Let's deploy the Coolstore Application into {{PROJECT}}!

From the **Application menu**, `*Click on 'Sync > Synchronize'*`.

image::{% image_path argocd-sync.png  %}[Argo CD - Sync, 800]

This task retrieves the manifests from the GitOps Repository and performs _kubectl apply_ command of 
the manifests. Your application is now running and you can now view its resource components, 
logs, events, and assessed health status.

`*Click on your 'coolstore' application*` and you should see everything in green.

image::{% image_path argocd-synced-application.png  %}[Argo CD - Synced Application, 800]

In the {{OPENSHIFT_CONSOLE_URL}}[OpenShift Web Console^], from the **Developer view**,
`*Select the '{{PROJECT}}'*` to be taken to the project overview page.

image:{% image_path openshift-app-deployed-by-argocd.png %}[OpenShift - Coolstore Project Deployed by Argo CD , 700]

You can see that all resources of your application have been created by Argo CD. 
None of the services is deployed, up and running as we removed all automatic deployment triggers when exporting the configuration
and there is no image available on your **{{PROJECT}}** project. **You are going to fix it in the next lab.**

'''

Well done! You are ready for the next lab.

Commit message:

Included USER_ID variable and removed unused one

guide/gitops-continuous-delivery.adoc, after:

== GitOps Continuous Delivery with Argo CD

_20 MINUTE EXERCISE_

In this lab you will learn about deploying and managing Kubernetes resources using a GitOps tool.

'''

=== Export OpenShift Resources

First, you need to export the project resources from OpenShift.

In your {{ CHE_URL }}[Workspace^], `*click on 'Terminal' -> 'Run Task...' ->  'GitOps - Export'*`

image:{% image_path che-runtask.png %}[Che - RunTask, 500]

image:{% image_path che-gitops-export.png %}[Che - GitOps Export, 500]

A terminal should be opened with the following output:

[source,shell]
.>_ GitOps Export
----
--- Export Kubernetes resources for GitOps from my-project{{USER_ID}} to cn-project{{USER_ID}} ---
Exporting resources for inventory-coolstore...
Exporting resources for catalog-coolstore...
Exporting resources for gateway-coolstore...
Exporting resources for web-coolstore...
--- Kubernetes resources has been exported! ---
----

This operation exports the project resources (deploymentconfig, route, secret, service)
and cleans them up. As a result, you should have all resources in YAML files under 
the **/project/workshop/lab/gitops** folder.

image:{% image_path che-gitops-export-result.png %}[Che - GitOps Export Result, 300]

'''

=== Push them into a Git Repository

The first step is to store all Kubernetes/OpenShift resources in 
a source code repository. You can use any Git server (e.g. GitHub, BitBucket, etc) for this lab but we have prepared a 
Gogs git server.

`*Click on the below button called 'Developer Repository'*`

[link={{ GOGS_URL }}]
[window=_blank, align="center"]
image::{% image_path developer-repository-button.png  %}[Developer Repository - Button, 300]

Then, `*click on 'Register'*` to register a new user with the following details:


.Gogs Registration
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter
|Value

|Username 
|user{{USER_ID}}

|Email
|user{{USER_ID}}@none.com

|Password
|{{OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD}}

| Re-Type
|{{OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD}}

|===

image:{% image_path cd-gogs-signup.png %}[Sign Up Gogs,700]

`*Click on 'Create New Account'*`. 
You will be redirected to the sign in page. Sign in using the above username and password.

`*Click on the plus icon*` as below and enter the following values

image:{% image_path cd-gogs-plus-icon.png %}[Create New Repository,900]

.GitOps Repository
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter 
|Value

|Owner*
|user{{USER_ID}}

|Repository Name*
|gitops-cn-project

|Visibility
|_unchecked_

|Description
|_leave it empty_

|.gitignore
|_leave it empty_

|License
|_leave it empty_

|Readme
|Default

|Intialize this repository with selected files and templates
|_unchecked_

|===

image:{% image_path gogs-gitops-new-repo.png %}[Create New Repository,700]

`*Click on 'Create Repository' button*`.

The Git repository is created now. 

'''

=== Push The Configuration to the Git Repository

Now that you have a Git repository for the Inventory service, you should push the 
source code into this Git repository.

In your {{ CHE_URL }}[Workspace^], via the command menu (`*'View' -> 'Find Command...'*`),
`*run 'Git: Initialize Repository'*`

image:{% image_path che-git-init.png %}[Che - Git Initialize, 600]

`*Select the '/projects/workshop/labs/gitops' folder, click on 'Initialize Repository' -> 'Add to Workspace'*`

In your {{ CHE_URL }}[Workspace^], open a new Terminal by `*clicking 
on the 'My Workspace' white box in the right menu, then 'Plugins' -> 'workshop-tools' -> '>_ New terminal'*`:

image:{% image_path che-open-workshop-terminal.png %}[Che - Open OpenShift Terminal, 700]

In the window called **'>_ workshop-tools terminal'**, `*execute the following commands*`:

[source,shell]
.>_ workshop-tools terminal
----
cd /projects/workshop/labs/gitops
git remote add origin http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/user{{USER_ID}}/gitops-cn-project.git
----

Via the command menu (`*'View' -> 'Find Command...'*`),
`*run 'Git: Close Repository'*`

Via the command menu (`*'View' -> 'Find Command...'*`),
`*run 'Git: Open Repository' and select the '/projects/workshop/labs/gitops' folder*`

Open the **Source Code Management (SCM) view** by clicking on `*'View' -> 'SCM menu'*`

`*Click on '...' -> 'Stage All Changes'*`

image:{% image_path che-scm-gitops-stage-all-changes.png %}[Che - SCM Stage All Changes, 500]

`*Click on the 'check' icon and enter 'Initial' as commit message*`

image:{% image_path che-scm-commit.png %}[Che - SCM Commit, 900]

`*Click on '...' -> 'Push'*`

image:{% image_path che-scm-push.png %}[Che - SCM Push, 500]

`*Click on the 'OK' button*` to publish the new **master branch**. 
Finally, `*enter your Gogs credentials (user{{USER_ID}}/{{ OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD }})*`.

image:{% image_path che-scm-username.png %}[Che - SCM Username, 500]

image:{% image_path che-scm-password.png %}[Che - SCM Password, 500]

Once done, in {{ GOGS_URL }}/user{{USER_ID}}/gitops-cn-project, `*refresh the page of your 'gitops-cn-project' repository*`. You should 
see the project files in the repository.

image:{% image_path gogs-gitops-repo.png %}[GitOps Repository,900]

'''

=== What is Argo CD?

[sidebar]
--
image:{% image_path argocd-logo.png %}[Argo CD Logo, 200]

https://argoproj.github.io/argo-cd/[Argo CD^] is a declarative, GitOps continuous delivery tool for Kubernetes.

It follows the GitOps pattern of using Git repositories as the source of truth for defining 
the desired application state. 

It automates the deployment of the desired application states in the specified target environments. Application 
deployments can track updates to branches, tags, or pinned to a specific version of manifests at a Git commit.
--

'''

=== Log in to Argo CD

`*Click on the below button called 'Developer GitOps'*`

[link={{ GITOPS_URL }}]
[window=_blank, align="center"]
image::{% image_path developer-gitops-button.png  %}[Developer GitOps - Button, 300]

Then `*login as user{{USER_ID}}/{{ OPENSHIFT_PASSWORD }}*`, `*click on 'Allow selected permissions'*`

Once completed, you will be redirected to the following page.

image:{% image_path argocd-home.png %}[Argo CD - Home Page, 500]

'''

=== Add your Newly Created GitOps Repository 

`*Select the 'Configuration menu' then click on your 'Repositories'*`

image::{% image_path argocd-configure-repositories.png  %}[Argo CD - Configure Repositories, 500]

`*Click on 'CONNECT REPO USING HTTPS'*` and enter the following:

.Repository Configuration
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter 
|Value

|Type
|git

|Repository URL
|http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/user{{USER_ID}}/gitops-cn-project.git

|Username (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|Password (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|TLS client certificate (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|TLS client certificate key (optional)
|_leave it empty_

|Skip server verification
|_unchecked_

|Enable LFS support (Git only)
|_unchecked_

|===

Finally, `*Click on 'CONNECT'*`.

Your GitOps repository is now added to Argo CD.

image::{% image_path argocd-repository.png  %}[Argo CD - Repository, 800]

'''

=== Create your GitOps Project 

`*Select the 'Configuration menu' then click on your 'Projects'*`

image::{% image_path argocd-configure-projects.png  %}[Argo CD - Configure Projects, 500]

`*Click on 'NEW PROJECT'*` and enter the following:

.Repository Configuration
[%header,cols=2*]
|===
|Parameter 
|Value

|Project Name
|cn-project{{USER_ID}}

|Project Description
|This is my first GitOps project

|Sources
|http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/user{{USER_ID}}/gitops-cn-project.git

|Destination
|* / cn-project{{USER_ID}}

|Whitelisted Cluster Resources
|_leave it empty_

|Orphaned Resource Monitoring
|_leave it empty_

|===

Finally, `*Click on 'CREATE'*`.

Your GitOps project has been created in Argo CD.

image::{% image_path argocd-project.png  %}[Argo CD - project, 800]


'''

=== Create a GitOps Application

`*Select the 'Application menu' then click on your '+ New App'*` and enter the following details:

image:{% image_path argocd-configure-application.png %}[Argo CD - Configure Application, 500]

.Application Configuration
[%header,cols=3*]
|===
|Section 
|Parameter 
|Value

|GENERAL
|Application Name
|coolstore

|GENERAL
|Project
|cn-project{{USER_ID}}

|GENERAL
|SYNC POLICY
|MANUAL

|SOURCE
|Repository URL
|http://gogs-gogs-server.workshop-infra.svc:3000/user{{USER_ID}}/gitops-cn-project.git

|SOURCE
|Revision
|HEAD

|SOURCE
|Path
|. _(dot)_

|DESTINATION
|Cluster
|in-cluster (https://kubernetes.default.svc)

|DESTINATION
|Namespace
|cn-project{{USER_ID}}

|ALL OTHER SECTIONS
|*
|_leave them empty/by default_

|===

Finally, `*Click on 'CREATE'*`.

Your Coolstore Application has been created in Argo CD.

image::{% image_path argocd-outofsync-application.png  %}[Argo CD - OutOfSync Application, 500]

The application status is initially in yellow **OutOfSync** state since the application has yet to be 
deployed into cn-project{{USER_ID}} OpenShift project, and no Kubernetes resources have been created.

'''

=== Sync/Deploy The GitOps Application

Let's deploy the Coolstore Application into cn-project{{USER_ID}}!

From the **Application menu**, `*Click on 'Sync > Synchronize'*`.

image::{% image_path argocd-sync.png  %}[Argo CD - Sync, 800]

This task retrieves the manifests from the GitOps Repository and performs _kubectl apply_ command of 
the manifests. Your application is now running and you can now view its resource components, 
logs, events, and assessed health status.

`*Click on your 'coolstore' application*` and you should see everything in green.

image::{% image_path argocd-synced-application.png  %}[Argo CD - Synced Application, 800]

In the {{OPENSHIFT_CONSOLE_URL}}[OpenShift Web Console^], from the **Developer view**,
`*Select the 'cn-project{{USER_ID}}'*` to be taken to the project overview page.

image:{% image_path openshift-app-deployed-by-argocd.png %}[OpenShift - Coolstore Project Deployed by Argo CD , 700]

You can see that all resources of your application have been created by Argo CD. 
None of the services is deployed, up and running as we removed all automatic deployment triggers when exporting the configuration
and there is no image available on your **cn-project{{USER_ID}}** project. **You are going to fix it in the next lab.**

'''

Well done! You are ready for the next lab.
